A true account of the captivity of Thomas Phelps, at Machaness in Barbary, and of his strange escape in company of Edmund Baxter and others, as also of the burning two of the greatest pirat-ships belonging to that kingdom, in the river of Mamora : upon the thirteenth day of June 1685 / by Thomas Phelps. Phelps, Thomas. London : Printed by H. Hills, Jun. for Joseph Hindmarsh, 1685. https://hdl.handle.net/2027/uc1.b2821211 Public Domain, Google-digitized http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-google We have determined this work to be in the public domain, meaning that it is not subject to copyright. Users are free to copy, use, and redistribute the work in part or in whole. It is possible that current copyright holders, heirs or the estate of the authors of individual portions of the work, such as illustrations or photographs, assert copyrights over these portions. Depending on the nature of subsequent use that is made, additional rights may need to be obtained independently of anything we can address. The digital images and OCR of this work were produced by Google, Inc. (indicated by a watermark on each page in the PageTurner). Google requests that the images and OCR not be re-hosted, redistributed or used commercially. The images are provided for educational, scholarly, non-commercial purposes.III IIIG530º, True ACCOU O,F THE:CApiivity Thomas Phelps, MACHANESS BAR B.ARY. . . ..AND . ... . .;Of his*.Eſcape in Company of Edmund Baxter and others, alſo of the Burningas . Two of the greateſt Pirat-Ships belonging to that Kingdom, in the River of Mamora; uponthe Thirteenthday of june 1685. By THOMAS PH E L P.S. Her olim meminiſe juvabit. siances, Auguſt the 21ſt. R. L’s. LoNDo N, the PrintedbyH.Hills,Jun forjoſephHindmarſh,attheGolden Badover againſt Royal-Exchange incornhill. 1685. º ºTºI #. of of to my I itto where delivered the ſubſtance this following the to to the importunity as a to asſatisfying the curioof a who delightto far of;though;of as by : ſhould not implore Pittanage your ever Honoured ame, for none ever will dare of :i...ºf*:::::::: to -> Airſhasºſtôdºir*:::...;& Sir, Your Emilient of Ér,jº 4lty,jº: s . an!ghts, and the trºué Priy Updges His*::::. #...:;§#:. ſafe this condeſcenſioh atr of. Liſe His Sacred Majeſtyand Country; who have beenanºmy ºn,whichirºmºtiºmorº T-r-Hºnºrahe,EL,# Ełrs.AR,SI!--*, Narrative, and being preſs'd the World, which mineown incliFriends Publiſh which might tendnations were not averſe, my fellow Sea-merſ,mation well ſity I ºnly Cowgºry-men, ſhºuld bevery Novel and ºrangewanting myſelf, in toif diſpute the truth yºur ºpuntry inf ſerted poor; yet honeſt $ea-man, who the Servicehave devoted Slave, but now have ”Honourable sir.’ Tour moſt Obliged and Jiank Servant. º 5%).''"..... ) | * the infor ... -: .. .] ledges fiellion -u ... º .. ( .. -,–* ofaofSubjećtºſe are but indifferent, what Liberty happineſs with mhick former life was never acquainted; now that after are the happineſ; only valuable and camput have joy; Compariſon, Richº; Miracle put inted ſafe are unacqmainted with, by on, ; from the conſideration attend Poverty and Want him, *Liberty and Freedom Captivity and Slavery, they who Smy *..I.... LI rivery efore from captivity, andwſ, the Asyrian. *::::: have methinks, #oyd by'Storm and terrible Tempeſt, i . *\ ‘and Abandance have their Meaſures ..s.º.º. ºv.º.º. tº...' who has wbawe keen taught, viz. that *ative, and never was acquainted with Pain avalue only parapan of is, III all by England, altho' yet find. alinary emotions and Ángular that happineſs, which before fervation agrees very well with Happineſs here below moſt unreaſonable and quiet Harbour, of the Miſeries and Inconveniencies that myand Barbarous immunities and freedom lº ‘’J . :**.. . * ... w. . ''... *. .. . : º *** ºr .. .. ... .... .. "sºlº, , ſ:::: e. g.... ." iT '...'....” aws º'***after ty -º a 'ro '.'Health can . a HT Ia Ivalue and make juſt effimate of never well underſtoad, which al Morals remember tranſports a of it leſſon of in am be good and convenients, Iaffeded with extraor now my Men; wow Native Country, circumſtances moſt miſerable EH . E. s: i-a .. of but ſlightly effeemed . Slavery, or : *Sickneſs, and . •' \le tº ,that enjoy the and the PriviI other only Rs.is “. . byaRe #ww .. to . . the a . ." .The Preface to the Reader. with, and have monotice of the Miſeries of the latter, wi&ng: verput a due Walse and conſideration upon the former; of which general Rule,the moſt partif my country-men, Iam ſorry to ſay, are too particular an inſtance, all the Nations of thewho 1.'Eºrth are paſſeſſors ºf the greateſt Lilerty, but leaſt ſenſible of ººthe happineſs; Here the Government ſecures every Man in ahe puffſon and enjoyment of what Gods bleſſing and Here even the Poor and Needy, the Impotent, and his , own induſtry bas allow'd; God has touch'd, have Jºffence, and plentiful proviſion againſt all ofthºſe whom the Hand comfortablea extremities; Here ſtatcountry-Farmer,orthe induſtriess Mechanick downcaw his yº Taşbitterprovided gueſes Germany, Marofthat many Barons Spain;France, and Knightsinininword Slaveryſoil,itsisa England, thatºrange toto the People have?at iscondition toucha wiaćto Manumiſſion, and the generality and leſs underſtood the miſerable State which theto, of :little heard,*ſºpmt that the Plenty andofnow ſubjeſt ſothe World is is, §xeur Liberty I ‘āken, becauſe they neverweigh their condition Zpon this conſiderationI the Miſeries underwent, with tape thence. my the Engliſh Sabjeåsofgreat happineſsnotois with what isthe ofLet have advenother Nations : oftared toPubliſh this account *::::: our Captivityº Chriſtian Reader, Eſ:-many others, Barbary, andisof intoºffgn work thee ăy of this true, the plain Narrative, ſome pitty towards the ſharp.ºf...; usto to of that pleaſant place, where thy LotAir, phow haſ his word, ‘commands works withºInfaels;Jºfferings thy poor Brethren attoofthe hands prize the bleſſings of fallen, and where having only the beneftº,tothee isa gºodly Heritage;Ged, who ofMagniffe the Nameand with me, tell what things he us,inbath forhistoſhewforthdase and A True Account of my being taken, and Sufferings during my Captivity. Pon the 27th day of Auguſt 1684. I Thomas ſetPhelps inſail from the Downs Veſſel calleda London, about fourty Tuns, ladenofthe Succeſs with Salt, bound for place inIreland calledwea dathe Pentrey, arrived the 10th,where ofwhile, and kill'd Beat, onforSeptember deſigning the Zoth Iſetfor ſtayed there ſome and Mount Sarrat; accordingly September, I; the Madera's ofthe Madera's,ſail but my deſign was croſt, and my Voyage ſtopt the (being then Hundred Leagues,of asfolloweth : Upon of5th. Ottober aoff up Lisbon)us,which immediatly we found ſail we could from him, and night coming on, the riſing oftoſailthe Rock we ſaw windwardWeſt a usgivetochace;we made what we had, for loſt ſight him, butabout Two hours, ofofatthe Moon, hegot ſight ingus whence us, and quickly came with us, hailof us for our Ship, we anſwered from London, deman him, who made anſwer from Algeir, and hdiſt out our Boat, which ding the like of towithal commanded we rewedo, but him, immºto by fuſed diatly brac'd our head-ſailes inewas got almoſtſent his Boat towards us, when it our ſide, we gave them Three ſhouts, which ſoſurpriz'd them, that they thought itconvenient toretire aboard their Bown … ( 2) own Ship; We were not a little chear'd at their departureallthe ſail we could make, for we for Powder, believe one ſinI and made from them with had not one great Gun, and gle pound was the outmoſt as heour ſtore: Pathe mean timeof was hoiſting Boat,him, which made me think his IIofhad got above two miles from him, and withal great, that,no in ofwas clear ſhethat the Ship muſt according an I in, Algerine,Englund,Sallé; But while, mightily miſlaken, for again: We had try’d could not wrong him any way forand tis, i up I I of beappearing ſo thought ſuch Shiptointhe ſtories could belong tofound my ſelf within little was hoi a asashis Boatſoon hisheuspreſently fetch'dſted weallſailing ways, but found ; thing impoſſiblehim, notwithſtanding ſoſightſeeing him ſtern, toloſe àaa light was poſſeſtput out : that time (God knows) with fear enough, but Ithought,Dark, my ſeeming confidence and reſolution might heſoastotoIimpºſe upon him, fancywastotruly afterwards confeſſed me, thſome forceĀnd at thoughthad ofheI:ſix IGufis aboard and thatdid intend fight him.me out Turkiſh colours, which ſanſwered with ; it He kept night, and the morningofallheinputſterna our Engliſhfight, myformenoup, and ſaw Łhad ſtow'H'down betwixt decks, heinthen boatcame heboat was commanded hetotomy head-ſailes, and then ſent histherefore brace Heus by demand my paſs; Aboard her was who formerly had been England and ſpoke good Engliſh, and who was liberty our late Gracious King antoantient Moor,boat inſlavea ſetat ſeeing£harles the ºd. inreadineſs with what arms. hemeI we had, ask'd me, toto the Peace,mindifIhad breaka ofkeep them outtold not trouble my ſelfneeded our forbetoperſwadedofWeſſel, them could come aboardnone thebrought him my Cuſtom-houſe-Cocketts, The Moor aforeſaid carried them fornohadcriº.Paſs to: Oil (3) n after returned, and told me that would notſatisfit the made 40Captain, unleſs the Maſter himſelf would come ſwer that would not come, that had done what III :was3 blig'd tobythe Articles 'twixt Bngland and Algiers: The their Ship, and whilſt their boat, made what ſailI for I ſecond time put away . boat they a could,were hoiſting in ormore from them again, entertaining got milewas a the night before the Moors made ſail and came ; upasbetter hopes than and ſtow'd, inasBut ſoonwas1 inthe boat was I to he with me again, the Captain ordering his Ship; with that my Weatherº; ſtays, which put him into ſome confuſion, he had then up which could perceive, ſaw his Ports, and Hehisno .AsIIheMan-high came aboutrun under hisſtern, then bore upafortoallaaway right before the Wind, not one ſhot pas'd this while, clapt ſtays run thwart hisheſoon came demanIhalſe;with me, but whyded anſwered thatofmeI I retotell me, thatifl him, would come aboard me withfus’d boardcome a imherang'd quarter,I put a Gun,toſtays alſofothat putwas forced a: Waſt wasI hedoubted Algier,ofheifI Engliſh, would have diſcover'd him that aboard,his toinſworewas not me hehethat was, elſe before this ſelf, and withal hetold me, did not come hehe I would ſtraightway ſink me, and the mean time boat,hoiſted outhisſo upincomingboar away, but back; boat ma I me bring board, toagain and brace His boat then came ofaa ask'd this Moor, who ſpoke Engliſh, what ſhip heAlgiers readily without ſtammering the Tagerene young Canary Com immediatly then went into his boat; ſhethis was told me, very, was call'd mander, ſoasIſoonI hehis mecame aboard, the Captain ask'd lief, My diſtruſt was ſuch then thatI Iwhy pray'd the Captain now beofſohardwas tointhat reſolve me whetherhad me aboard power, hehe I he 2. not,loº, toorſworeSallé-man Algiers, and that were a . was ofbeHeme again that wrong'd :made me ‘me ſit(4)down, and caus’d them toſetDates and Figgs before me: was made acquainted Ship, gone my be he helittle after the Captain told me thatAbyhis men that they ſaw two Portugueſes aboard would have them out, and thenheIand that about my buſineſs,I ſhould had none ſuch aboard, buttold him would ſce them two men, I two men were ſent for, afterſo hehethat told me muſtthere were three more and them wasſuſpicious that me thatI Ihetobehave, ſhort, atwell laſt was a was one,I found mytoPortugueſe alſo, and convince fel all of entertainment preſently withdrawn? Thus did this faithleſs him except two, and then the valiant Moors entred my Weſ. he courage, heaving the two remainingEngliſh over the head ina allBarbarian ſerve me, until had wheadled my men aboard ofwith abundance the Veſſel into the boat. ſunk, becauſe they of but Imme great fright, obliging themus,§ſome ſmall time the five Veſſels of to us, Strip'd, the Veſſel Plunder'dThus were we mo ſail ment, which they did reſolve Sea diſtant from their own coaſt, tohave atwere too farr wediatly bearing down upon which ſtartledſaw five to the Moors, putting them into quit my Veſſel with abundance a Beaf and three Boxes of us, dry goods aboard, which their fear would not rummage Intoforleaſure : when they came within two Leaguesdiſcover'd had they bore down afterwards with that reſolution, that they threatned before, the Pirate would never have ſtood the face; but alaſs like diſtraćted fearful game,look them inallevery the five Ships took night they After that we cruiſed about thirty Leagues ſeveral courſe, and being nowofa eſcaped. ofto no the Weſt the Burlings, buttoſo forforI the Northern Cape, and Twenty Leagues ſmall veſſels bound that way, nearer than toimagin therethe ſhoar, and thereforeI tomore ſafety keep theis ſhore asnear asispoſſible, know certainly they never attempt to come near, but endeavour as much as they can,to z r ( 5) to avoid the ſhoar becauſe our Men of War uſe to careen at Lisbon. that ſmall time thatIi am likewiſe pretty well ſatisfied for was too long profit) that: Ship Ten Guns, which from Briſtol, whilſt formy I I no by was amongſt them, altho'sa/grin will fight County-man with him andup it offounda ofobſervationtrue a hail'd him, andWe camewas aboard : hishisBoat, but herefuſed,would have had him put andout So withal ſhew’d himſelf ready we were glad own defence, upon whichin toleave him. allmy Country-men who follow mytothat ſatisfie affirm, Ship ofdare confidently Tentrade that hadifIaI beGuns, and oftotheſe ( by ſhould who peace allgomy fortune under the notion encounter anyit Sa/e-rogues, ofAlgerines, with England, acquainting would encourage himwho are now atI toſend his boat, him that our Maſter would the thing they aim my ſide, (any manAlor of edof I to come aboard and ſhew his paſs, (whichat) And when the boat was come reaſon may judge then giers, but however is from Sa/éwhether ſhe were judg allAlgiers meſave two, )I bewould commit nothingPeace, 'twixt Fngland and ſhould breach thea Grapling and ſecure the men,in I would heave whom a Chrido would permitt return aboard and bring my Paſs, toa ſtian, Ithat, ſelf obliged orthey will notelſe aver ifam of,deis,hetothen ſatisfied what and think my he I I we we fend my ſelf from Slavery, but this will never ſtay diſpute the caſe afterward. fortnight after we ſoon am very confident tothat was taken,About met one Samaela.. Crampton who came from Faro, and tookwhom The week following ſmalfwithout any reſiſtance. took a Ketch come from Cales, laden with Sherry and Raiſins and bound for Limrick, john Elliot Maſter. The number ofusChriſtians taken aboard the Three Prizes was Twenty five, beſides Twelve which were aboardT. the ( 6.)Thirty ſeven; We who were newly taken in allthe Pirate, in --. were kept inIrons the Hold. .. After the taking theſe Three Veſſels the Pirate made forof allof ſave the ſpring Tide, which about Thirty Leagues:Fleming who from Salle, and told our Commander that the Engliſh-men Tangier then, attending Captain Nicholaſon, W for hetothe ſail could Sallé flows atSallé and Mamora SS To the ofSallé,Northward we met acame atWar were dircétlyustowhich cauſed bear direétly with the Caſtle, where inSallé and fell noWar,ofEngliſh-men acwere cording tothe Advice. On the Bar ofgreat Sea, which obliged Anchor near the Bar,where we rid Six hours; looſe from our Iron Twenty days the Captain ſent the Boat,he for to Sallé there run a ustoantocome allletthen were we poor Chriſtians ſhackles, wherein we had been confin'd preceeding: asnear the Shore the Bar, poſſibly could,oftoenquire whatthe South News, as there they were acquainted that they might, ſafely high Water: Shore, the Moors, we obſerv'd, fell in all whilſt the Boat was gone the Cap the nextcome a ſleep,faſt a tain alſo, with his Head over the Rail, upon the half-Deck ſeem'd deeply ingag’d: This opportunity me thought was very inviting, oftopropoſal fellow Slaves,made itmyaI dotoCaptains buſineſs my ſclf: Theand undertook the comply with the motion,Chriſtians were forward enough to for the Twelve, (which were Slaves retain’d the Ship before our being taken they alſo were willing,if the the Ship would have conſented, ofinand Eleven Twelfth who was Steward in but this ſneaking varlet prov’d recreant, and offear him. tothe other Eleven turn’d alſo Renegadoes this Heroick and reſolution; it, have diſpatcht the way firſt, but the fear that toChriſtian mind thishad aI ofoftroubler our peace out his fellow Slaves would have ſeverely reſented reſtrain'd. my reſolution; the Slaves Name was WłA. Robinſon, *#.C11º (7)fºr himſelf. Chriſtianin word, butindeedweſound more civility from the Moors than him. four the Afternoon, we weighed Anchor,and ſtoodAt ſtruck Twicegoing over, but without any dam: November, in we we we .. in forthe Bar, ofwas upon the Firſt dayShip, our Lodging, ourmage; hadafter to it Night allcarried aſhore,helped atmoor were Straw, having nothing ſave the bare dirtyPillow; the next Day we were alkor anold Stable, buttoand conveyed which was orwithout Litter we Ground for our Bed carryed aboard Unrigg her, and get out her Bal the Afternoon, was ſent for who paſſed his ſentence on I the Shipdid; abott Four to laſt, which in the Governour,totoaſhore come Three Maſters, that we ſhouldbythe King; we remained gohis Houſe, and thereusto remain,until wewere ſent for hisat HouſeTen days,where our daily employment was his Family; length there came be toGrind the anOrderofCorn for the uſe at alloftocarryed tofor us, and the Chriſtians thethe reſt King, whoſe Ordinary Machaneſs,aatand then Reſidence hiswasplace which this preſent Emperour has Fancy upon, and his care, and employs diſtant from Saſſé about Seventy Miles,in ſetallofbeſtows moſt Chriſtian Slaves Building there; and from Fez Thirty. itis " In to our Journy thither, ordinary civility, cannot forget our Captains extra with Bor I Accommodatingus ſometimes ſo in Two days and half we arrived:inride on,ricoes that a thither: The Firſt night we were not brought before our great Maſter, but the following our Captain preſented usbefore him, and withal ſome Portugueſe Plate, which was taken, Mr.Crampton's Veſſel; the ſurly Tyrant with againſt the Wall, which was the Captain gave into his Hand,inasitI ſeeming ſcorn and diſdain heav'd the firſt Aétion ita usto obſerv'd, Patron Muley Iſº and ofdid my newa of little diſcover the temper mael Emperour Morocco and Fez, &c. He ordered theaswewebeſent amongſt reſt ofour fellow Slaves; went WCrC. (8) were entertain'd with the civilities of the place, and wel comed by the joyfull acclamations Moors kicking and ſlapping us Stranger,to all by and complements of the along, which appeared but that Nightwho was butvery uncouth me, a my fellow Captives allayed my wonder, acquainting me, ſutable Pro all that what had paſt was nothing, was only the Tragical ſufferings that Chriſtians ita tologue muſt enan dure there whilſt they are Slaves, which were could willingly, that very Night dreadful, thatſo have ventured my Life me the Tyran.I toeſcape; they Painted outtoendeavour the Emperour, both towards the Chriſtians ſuch Bloudy Colours, viz, how they had ſeen ofnical humour and Natives, in him Butcher many Thouſands with his own hands, how that behis preſence for that the varying ofainſecurenone can look, the Garment, orſmall ſpot inany ſuch inconſiderable the Emperours Nod all a circumſtance, will raiſe ſuch caprice orif asina dle, without any other provocation, toendanger the Heads before him, and he the company eſcape I through the #. Second day after my arrival thither, Seven and twenty Negroes one after another, very rare Two only Beheaded, itis orwith One Lanced Bodv. ſaw him Lance and every Day after, until Ior New-years-day, (when with his Army either ſaw parted toSanta Cruz his inhumane,but yet, Barbarities, Killing and ofheard through cuſtom, tohim Natural ofpicceVice-kingsDragging, but this latter reſpect obſerved only and Alcaids; yea his isa byMinions and Favourites, Women are not able to avoid his Fury,alltotheir Charms I but are more the objećts paſſion: his implacable rage than any otherof inthe Weſt-Indies,have been ſeveral times and ofdivers Inhumanities and cruelties pra-.have ſeen and heard Books, and have heard Learétiſed there, inhave alſo readI • toº the Sicilian Tyrants and Roman Em Ilaſſ10 ofI ned men diſcourſe but indeed forget them all, theyperours, are not ... ... . ( 9) namedin compariſon with this Monſter of 4friek, a cºm:poſition of Gore and Duſt, whom nothing can attone But humane Sacrifices, and to be in whoſe court it is much more hishishisMule, thanboſome, from whoſe greateſt his are tooreligible to be ofwife orbeHorſe Privado kindneſs my hishisgood God ever defend me,for cruel: YeaeyenEngland here in byall mercies Hamed Ben Haddu who was Embaſſadour here heThree years ago, altho'of with extraordinary civilities, and carreſs'd every where kindneſs and reſpect, fineneſs and Mooriſh ſubtilty, he by was received and entertain'd the endearments hisand altho' ſtole into the Inclinationsof of the well-meaning and good natur'd Engliſh, obtain'd the reputation Ingenuity and candour,Dog has return'd his Vomit, and by heſothat Yet the alltowoful experiment,my Country-men, who come under his power, find him harſh and cruel Maſter, who manag’d his affairshisknowledgeall a here with to deep diſſimulation, and now improvesliſh affairs, EngKings Sub of of by the detriment and ruin with whom do; thehejećts, be a to the Engliſh can thus, Aſli Haztebuck,†. of totoifhas his fortune is itmeet orofthem, his cuſtom all(asdeviliſh Curſe paſs anyatteſt) to arthe ſalute them with expreſt roaſt your Father: the beſta my remembrance i.e. God inisindeed reckoned great Maſter whichofDiffimulation and Flattery,the a as ſeems very requiſiteTyrant ofBarbarous BloodyinCourtier ſuchaa is.his Maſter tomeproceed, my fellow Chriſtians the ſtaff But the next place,Bread, in oftheir life there,ſhewed i.e. their ofBarley,but black, and withalit ſtunk, the Cornwhich was if being kept Seven years under Ground before us'd, one Daysſold, would yield only Nine Fluces,allowance which4 toThree Farthings;Beef, but Mony cheap, both Mutton andFleſhmount is ſcarce, Two pounds and are ordinarily ſold for isahalf ofBeef,Blankil, i.e. Two Pence half-peny,C. and a (. 19)theſºmerate, gºodwhite. EnglaaſjibºFarthing, amdnot am confident there is Two pounds of Mutton at half inascheapasisBread aalſo plentiſuf, the Slaves who have not without Mony;to I thisis iswhat usofallow'd Chriſtian there, who hath not taſted ºf5 bit morſºl hot icog aa“”many a Five Months timeinFieſh pleaſant Champion Country, very Fruit. plenty;Fruit Two days The Countryful, well Watered, we Chriſtians who arrived laſt, were excuſed weour deportmentsie ofall in offor inisa ſortsprodućtive . for from Labour, only our Negrº-Taskmaſters, who afterwards gave and lapſes; our work and Daiſy uswere inſtructed ſevereichs is fliſmén; Labour was continually Building very Forreign and ofour miſtakes Houſes and Walls; the will appealMethodMaterials and oftº tºtrange my Country-men here; there Boxes Wood according pleaſure, theſe the Lime, and Gravel wellbeit together and tempted with Water, and whāhfull, weremove the Box are Box Planks, and leave weoffillſtowith dimenſides Earthpºwdred order, had withdrawto is to as forweforaſ of the his dry, which then wiſh acquire incredibleaa *Hardneſs, and vetºkiffing, wediavº ſeen Waits ‘ſomeºHundred years ſtanding that time has nºt been abletºdottiegllany prejudice. ** The King himſelf (what thereaſon ask him) will ſometimes vouchfillºf hour together, add according tothis matter were informed, and hunour maybe 1. toin never had the curioſity the Line and DurtI is, work will bolt out in"encouraging wºrd Liferus, that Slaves then, viz.ſafe to toyour ownGod ſend youremember,asIfrom his or I he he ofI either does not ſpeakcountries, but hopes God will not anſwer the Prayers wicked wretch; with this ſort Labour judge, ofa aof Heart, elſe made fuch withouta noorpáſs away? alſ. the Winter; and indeed ſhirt, only the Charityſhift to other ſhiftIquible, were better provided, accommoda my fellow Slaves, who ted had ººN. { 11) saw with isºeing fism tº cold, which*...*my life.tºº,º,itifI iſ would firinge, diſſatisfied and very weary of my condition, and therefore I did often rummage allto was; :TheRé will nothink : my thoughts, for ſome expedientLiving, but Starvingof by I ofthis accurſed way, not and Dying daily: My mind did often running away, andoffident Chriſtians, eſpecially by to eaſe me flatter me with the ſoLiberty coff.greateſt poſſibility my intentions ſeveralwas, that diſcoveredI my near acquaintance, whooftothoſe tobehear the difficulties andnocould induc’dmeans Inthe mean timereſolution:dangers that attended ſuch England had taken ſome a for my Raninmy Friends care anEngliſh One hun Mr Luddington,ſome, and had given order Bárbary, dred and fifty Pounds would effe&b to tomy relief it,which Sum Mr. Lud. ifinendeavourMerchant tois, or hetlington acquainted the ofagree with my Patrón for my Ranſome) for Eight: proferedI dislºurſe, couldwas ready ifI ºut, that piecesSix hundred Seven hundred accepted; upon which deſperate,my forlorn and languiſh Ibethe ſaid Süm, but would notit ºflifelouktupefºny-conditioning ſtate as of to Redemption, (which on ſuch great affli thbſe, upon-whom God and Nature of Mankind,” appearađ, far. worſe than the teºrours ofwithdat any hopes *ions, aād Bondageſ to Slaveryofhave impreſt charaćters the reſttofeetins ofmoſta Ifſetup to cruel Death; then ny fixt and unalterable reſolution eſcafé whatever fate attended it, leaving the everit Providence; to had more than conjecture, that preſent Death were retaken, forofbetoifIthe reward my endeavourswas who ſome Two Months before were taken,ThreeSpaniards,ºalkingtheireſcape, theKingcauſed them tobebrought Bebis B ownlands prov'dtotic Butcher, which cruel proccidings did wholly diſhgarten ºre him, and with and **ecutioner, 2.the ( 12)the ons allſuch reſolutipoor Spirited Chriſtians, quite out and baniſhed Atlengthofopened my mindtheir minds: I toYear and half before, hadaaMr. Baxter (who about unlucky attempthad the Baſtinadoheanaway, but being broughtſort that hetomade run inback ſuch could nota ſor by his his work Twelve Month, having Irons continually upon Leśgs) but notwithſtanding, Chri I ture with any fair opportunity; after had him thus engag'd promiſe, he Day; no Iwe his of of a ſuch lovewas ſtian Liberty, that hefreely told me, that would adven had pitch'd upon our Forreſt, untilgave him we alſo took into our Cabal and ſharea antunes, Two Briſtol-men, who were ready athours war ning, when we appointed. Eight hundred and ſixty whereof Mony for their of atMachaneſ; preſentNations, Two hundred atThere are about allofChriſtians are Engliſh, ſeveral ofwhich have tendred Ranſom, ſome Seven hundred, ſome Five hundred piecesEight, ſome more, ſome leſs, but the King ſtill put them off with this, that hewould clear none particularly, but that an gotogether.january the Firſt, The King allthey ſhould ſetforward towards Santa Cruz,with Army about Sixty thouſand men, deſigning toof quel his Nephew, who had made againſt him, formidable Inſurrečtiona ofinhis Dominions: We Chriſtians that part ofthe certain proceedings fight Dog, fight Bear, ofcould not Inform our ſelves theſe Armies, neither did we much care, be he Two ſuppos'd that any particular orbut this we learnt, will Three years beforethat it behis return, and toitisnot bewill return; beſides,Chriſtian releas'd until there is nobe all by tobe laid upon the moſt ſolemn word and proteſta this ſwarthy Infidel Muley Iſmael, for, Five years ago, hopes to ofasItion have anor ſet becm inform’d, about Four ment agreeKirk, the Engliſh ſlaves werewith Collonel Fºi.ead,liberty atthe rate ofTwo hundred piec, ofat (13 } head, and the bargain was ſo farſtruck, that the Chriſtians Town, But the accurſed Jews, (thethe Earth, Malicious they of of to ofwere got aMile out peſt ofthe Nationsſtench and allMan-kind and loathſome and abominable whereever who not only have the blood ofthe Saviourcome, the World lying upon their heads, but are acceuntable for the ofofhis Members which they dailyChriſtianity, brought back many Thouſandsblood ſhed). Theſe wicked Enemies of ofbondage thus, they the King Engwouldſobe theſe poor Chriſtians into the houſe proffered the Emperourland rendred for the Chriſtians heofasmuch monyRanſome, as if City for the Jews, the King? The covetous rant ſoon clos'd with theſe advantageous terms, and the Chri only lend them for while, to tobuild andTyaa bethen they ſhould reſtor'd the Jews, who imploy'd them Three the juſt JudgGod!The Jews were turn'd out,and forc'd give place ſee toans were turn'd over City, but when finiſh'd,buildinginyears a oftoment tothe Moors: Another remarkable ſtory concerning the Jews by cannot but inſert upon this occaſion ago, Mr. Bowrey the Sallé-men, About Three years Briſtol was, with Twenty ſail more, I: of ofBowrey had Ship, which then did belong parcel the King; Ben Haddu AmSoaptaken inhisa to to England deſir'd Jew out bid him, and buy this Soap had the Soap, inofthe King,baſſadour but ſofor which dea.a hismind againſt the them, after this manner, ling the Ambaſſador grudgeonkeptJews, and was reveng'd He inform'd the King that ina whilſt the Jews had imwas there.I Fifty thouſand pieces upofin pos'd upon him and couzen'd him Eight the matter Ten ofof the Soap, upon which the King claptuntil they ſhould either ofin Priſon,chief Jewsthe elſe reſtore the Soap, which beorpay the ſaid Sum, ſuppoſed, toitis Chriſtendom Two years ago. hath been ſold in -An A'.A'.to rº. of 2 . a An : “ſl:{{I} ;-‘’”*-* -º**.*........... :---.* ..----. for Edmund theuld come would eaſily diſcover that and james Ingran: Baxter, and others from Barbary. accepted, our journey, piece, the conduct quicken but peereeding ‘. ... .. an ſerious *onſideration, finding that for my redemption would proceedings Almighty be of to Kings: Hodſº diſtaatſabout Three miles:frºm contëal out ſolves about that houſe until night, the greater, ſecurity; because reſolving #eſoſving affda romiſing we kndw ſome Chriſtians uſed commonly Horſe the Moor whö'fived ofOn the 29th. Blankil, Öſe), 24 exeus’d from work that day, we went there foreof ºf víg. nine Blankils, we laid #acks' bladders, with journey deſigning About Three ..... .... . . .. ..:... ::: Ci, ...! Ziº: . Machaneſs, and having but . ob. Baxter; Hºthony Bayle,May, agreeing with our Guardian-Moors we had the liberty the Town to us, be a . to to uphe we diſcover'd upon which oblig'd our pace, and keep 101 make of Account A . , 'i' ºſº,,…ſ. r to : ----, -º-º: -in ; with us, of 4. my * the clock our ſelves of . . to & , . , . go c.; in a Eſcape !,. Eſcape, Mr. Edmund * . tº 2–-i my .1. . * ,ſº. ..*.>.. ..as it a :at far in little Burdock . out a that houſe, the Afternoon we began our ſmall ſtock in . (;" . company asa . in head an to 13 Old houſe, cai'd the Bread, and two ſmall * tº of ‘. him ºrd to I caſh about Three more,º. .. ,for, ifwehe us a carry to loaded ,; Water ,, ; providence no . –.... . proffers . . 1 ..... -,. º'íº committed Machaweſs work there, did ( 15) belong made haſ before him, and coming near the houſe, ed did Twenty Moors ſitting there; which accident notto by Wewethe ſaid houſe, herºfore diſcover'd about being hem theſe our cnemies, put deſign, us to of inintobehind and before allgreat fright, and had likely hood ſpoil'd our providence had ina inpreſentedLime-kills, ifthe very entrance, onour view, not toofthe houſe, parcel we immedially ſtruck ofone ſide a which, without the Moors obſervation welying flat upon our hour after came two Mooriſh byup, where bellies; about half abſconded our ſelves anwomen up be thither, very inconvenient gather ſome looſe wood, we confideringtoit toſelves fearful, leſt 'we ſhouldſhew our them, but theytotaken for Renagadoes, ſpoke return'd noanſwer, following their buſineſs, and taking us, asvvcus judged, either for Moors ſaid. Lime-kills ſovve continued.there vyihout Chriſtians employ'd about theor any further our jouronmoleſtation, until might, vvhen veſproceeded ney, traveling about Eighteen miles that night, vve paſſed great many Tents, vvhence the Dogs came out and barktbya q. us, and the Moors alſo ſavv ſus, but, ſaid: nothing, miſtatº to at king usfor their Country-men...That night vve croſt the great River, ºed:..... vvhich runs dovvn to At Mampra, about Eighteen miles diſtance from Machaweſ;, the River, our lodging cusſºund ofmile from the bankand about wye found aa up diſturbance allthe dayconvenient buſh, vvhere vve took followving, vvithout any night vac: our ſºlves oblig'd vvith Watcr; the littleneſs oftothe ſaid River,totofurniſhreturn our veſſel, vv.hich contain’d by Gallon, being our progreſs of our journey Tvvelve miles that night, vvhich ingreat hindrancenot above aa: We continued prov’d very buſhes,tireſome reaſon the vvceds and vye v.viſh'd; juſt aboutand the nights vvere not long asſo Day-break, togreatvve found convenient buſh near aa Valley, asasthe daybroke–w-TE=mºrepos'd our ſelves;vvhere vve ſoon º broke clear, weCattle graſing bottom, with Moors,who lookt after them,but, Gods pro ſafe that day,being the laſt dayAtnightnoonly wild beaſts, the us,welayall byofinthe ;: ſaw abundance vidence, none came near ſothat |||ſ. ſetofMay.(i.the Woods, whereforwards, keepingwe ſaMooriſh Inhabitants,!t!! leſswere ſiſ vage and formidable, which we often ſaw, but they never ſiſ. attempted tocome near us, we travel'd about Ten miles that night, and then croſſed Water, whereof we were River, which ſuppliedwant; on the other ſide uswithO!!! a ſ:#.ſ: jºofinthe we...;little further progreſs the Hill, where under ofa in River, Cattle,the footſteps great manywe obſerv'd place, unſafe for us, wewhich rendred the as the morning, tomade therefore a oflarge Oak we found for our reception that day, but within buſh15ſſ the top aa littleconvenient a up all while we were diſturb our repoſe, obſerviñg the Cattle the Hill, directly that buſh, with Moors our luggageup to i. . ſ:in come graſing to their heels, withathaſt therefore we pact up mile further, without being diſcover'd, Pear tree, furniſh'd with long-graſs and ran until wea round him,tocame aa allthat day, being the Firſtthere we took our quartersofJune.|Öſ. wepleaThe night following, ſed God, I proceed, but with the Gout, that tointended it toſtrike melame ſowas not all to toI night, and the day .#my companions, and afflićtion toſtand,able was forced therefore remain there that which was great hindrancecº.a I I my ſelf: The readieſt which the ground, and to expedient toremedy my diſtemper, could think upon was this, we made ininputfire holeaa by my the pain, having alſo my Foot, for the Lancet would not the fire: My tous,I my Foot into the hole draw away a toin I I Lancet with but however, endeavour'd breath Weina it,enter,could not effect ofthe forcefound ſome eaſe . ºjã hº it. * & ſºcompany being ſenſible ofthe delay, which diſtemperoccaſion'd, (17)occaſion'd, began to be mov’d, inſomuch that they told me, thatifIcouldnotmarchwiththem thatnight,theymuſt hold themſelves oblig'd to take leave of me, which added a great afflićtion to my ſorrow, inſomuch as I was the Au thor and firſt mover of this eſcape; That I might not there fore be forſaken by my companions, and in compliance to their importunity, I reſolved to ſtrain my outmoſt power.The third of june at night I endeavoured to go, but in great pain, ſo that we could not proceed above Three miles, when I was forc'd to pray my Companions to ſtay but that night, and I did not queſtion, but by Gods bleſſing, to be able to travel with them the next, they conſented,forand ſo we took up our lodging that night,ofthe remainder under another Pear-tree. .. .. all in I Ijane kept baking my foot the Ground, till about two the Afternoon, while, procur'd Mr. Baxter ofThe fourth the day in... inthe mean heI wooden Leg,did, perſwaded them, then, Four miles that afternoon, to tomake me a which accordinglyvel about Three traorwhich would. of the night, they agreed, travel'd about Four miles with that Leg, and then reſted till night I high Hill, whence onoflittle eaſe the laboura great plain valleythe topbefore we ſawaa us. At by night we ſhap'd our courſe clear vel'd over the edge ſeveral fields the Tents, and traof the plain, about Six miles; We paſtof ofthe mean time hallowRicorn, the Moors ining frighten the wild beaſts from them: Croſſingtoofa vºr that night, we ſaw and heard ‘proach'd ſeveral Lyons, ſome ap near that we could almoſt have touch'd them,butſo we At we ſtrook fire, which we had prepar'd for that very they preſently vaniſh'd; took our quarters asasſoon purpoſe, the light began towhen fordiſplay itſelf, was june the the next day, which courſe,nightFifth we continued our; -when Hwas ſtill lame, which was Dagreat hindrance tomy company, \ I&) company, but we were loath to part, our bread alſo was almoſt at an end, the conſideration whereof oblig'd me to ſtrain hardtogetEightmilesthatnight:Byreſtingthe next daI found my # to be ſomething better, but then to†.tomy joy forthis, Another companion Anthony Bayle began by ſink and give over. 3ame the Sixth, We ſet onward,noſtay we to and meaſur'd Ten miles that night, whenpain renewing,I toagreat Swamp, there mycame tofain would have perſwaded thembut could perſwade our Bread, reſolvingthem, ſointreaties I part, we ſhar'd peice; towhich came two half Rusksa totoallure my weak weariedendeavour'd Brother abide with me, comforting him with the expectationdens, Garof offorwhere we two more eaſily than the companymight provide He would not ſtay; Beingreſt thus with the conſideration being left alone,#. ofI Four, our ſelves; Re.toput forward, when pleaſed God, that my footofthe Gout;. That nightHill, where we fancied we it became perfectly whole and clear high barrenwe travel'd over a ofheard the Suſs and noiſe the Sea, which encourag'd touswemend our pace until we met with Garden, where ga very comfortaall a ofther'd about ſmall Pumpkins,dozenaa toble aſſiſtance ſome we eat raw, and ſome we roaſted now that our Bread was ſpent, forus, inthe ground, whereby no we found our ſelves conſiderably refreſht; That night we Eight miles, for meeting with greattoOak which was blown down, we thought inconvenient made more then a it forthe next day,deſirous off, becauſe we heard overſlip ſuch which we anadvantageous were the more retirement awe of ſeegreat many Moors, tho' Allthe next day we lay ſtill and with exceeding them,could not content onnight we putatthe Sea,ment we heard the noiſe and the ſhoar, whereto † we found whereabout we thendºgOllie. came were, viz. tothe Southward ofMamora, we ( 19) Courſe then Northward for Two miles, when we could di ſcern the Caſtle, but knowing that we could not go to the northward of the Caſtle, becauſe the great River goes di rectly up into the Country, turn'd back about a mile, and ğ.ğ.we theday,allfinding a convenient buſh, we reſted there next hearing and ſeeing great many Cattle, but none came neara US. fune the Eighth, we gathered about half Land-Tortois, which weSnailes, and eat har ofPecka and caughttily, that day alſo, roaſtedawethe Offing, when night we made down towards the Caſtle, and before Ship inſaw a was come, by Moor making draw back, the Moor not diſcerning us, we fetcht fire, whichwe were aware we fell upon aa tousforc'd compaſs, tothen another way came down ſtrong watch, theanda which did whollyCaſtle, there we found a ſetupdiſcourage relief from that place, our Reſolutions for Salé, about Eighteen Twentybe ofour expe&tations ſowe or the Southward, ſee what good couldtotomiles done there, But before we parted with Mamora, we made bold little Barley and Guinny corn, growingwith under thea ofofCaſtle, we gathered quarter ſerve our neceſſities, and then we betook our ſelves each whereof about toaa Peck, to our former nights refuge, the Buſh, and after having conſulted for Salé, the reſult whereof wastohow ſteer our courſe a alllong the Sea-ſide,bance. the next day without diſturwe reſted it, june the Ninth, We travel'd along the Sea-ſide, where we Raft-timber, make but therefore,ofſaw great deal we concludeda the Offing,did, and put off with toweſeeing the Shipdinglyboyart with all Raft, which accor ſwim, We tra ina would notit of aſhore, night, fearingall,ustherefore and cutwe came our Laſhings, leaving tothe Seathe mercyit: webeyel'd Five miles towards Sallé that ſtaying long thereabout byleaſt for ourfootſhouldD 2.ing Impreſſionº:the( 29) Timber had made ſuchingend traying of*the#: an anHundred men had beenupight we miles ſhortof Sallé wherewaswe Fig-tree, about Seventi,. … inatook our quarters noInhabitant. ..., made forwardſtosiſ, ther funetherentharnight,Road, we Dogs were ready ſell anſwer and travel'd on, without any far we made towards the Gardens, and gathered. we farwe in Tents, where though theofparcelupon a notoſeize us, and the Moors themſelves call’d tous, We made Sallé,orastodanger, asther trouble until ſoon wecame came thither, ſome Pumkins, and becauſe night was Town, ſpent, retrea: oftoplace whichted about mile out find ſomea might ſecure Valley ſelves the day following: About Eleven we pitch'd uponusinfrom diſcovery Buſha; togreat wherein we reſolv'd encloſe,,aour. ofofthatthe clock day, we eſpied hisaBoy with Dog keeping ofSheep, but yet.a not forgeting by his we game, which was hunting we were lodg’d,and threvvin Stones, weand the Dog alſo did part, barking and courſing about. Partridges;of He beat the buſh wherein thought, were not eſpied,the buſh, but asmiracle ſcar amongſt our ſelves, forof,oftho' we diſcover'd abundance we could not otherwiſe conifwe had been taken notice bythat poor ſillyof#our own ſafety, than the death weat of The eleventh day being paſt,Sallé, abºut all night mile above the Town, where made deſcenta tothe River a our ſtrength launch I we founda Boat, but could not with her: Anthony Bayle and into the only ſwimmers the River,found indeed who were oftomade the South-fideour company, over dono we could make there, we Three boats, but they were ſee what purchaſe allaground, ſothat we could good with them inſearchingBut about the new; Ships, which Five inweto number are building there) we found our conſorts,two Qares, with which ſwam over andall. ) the Rivers ſide,no ( 24 went down bywealltogether bours mouth, tothe but we could meet with toput ourboat the River, but theyin;We ſaw two Dutch-menOares in usdiligent watch, which hindredkept afrom carrying awaybury our Gartstointheir boat We concluded therefore at place, betook ourſothe ſand ſome remarkable and weforthe day following; We found toſanétuaryſelves Fig-tree full find out a ofanleaves, asunlrequented place,inwea of of onthe River, yet within call the Ships, vvhich then vwere building this little Tree, tho’ ſurrounded vith Enemies and dan expect the protećtion the next day; a poſſibiy judge this an 2 of thought, ofthe North-ſide Under the Covert oftogers, vve reſolv'd The Reader may Romaninſtance a of antick courage, and dent conſideration; Truly, in ofpru the right, for yve our effect rather raſh boldneſs than heis the ſame mind, ofſelves vvere about the middle the next Moor vvho had nevvly directs his courſe directly our Tree, and there day, upon this occaſion, vvaſhta his cloaths, to farAlhangs lovvſe himſelf, an’t pleaſe you; did hinder him from diſcerning upſathedry dowvn-s—tohis hage himſelfv.vhilſt off, toprovidencenut if allIus,aſſure you vvas notit provocation,ofconfett, andfor vvant asindeedvve 1 trembling fit,in of inmy life vvas asthat lovvſieſuchnever a Raſcal put uſe into. . to fune being paſt,River, night wwe boat, vvhich wwe The Tvvelfth day a atcame todovvn again look afterthe the River, half mile higher where vve found the Oares, this, vve vvho could ſwim had oºſ.iv'd vas moor'd ina than , toour conſorts, We padl'd her dovvn the found and brought bythe Dutch-men, vvho ſavvus, but ſaid nothing, our Oares, vve River cloſe ſhore,º,vye put until vye had paſt continuedthen and fetchta Ta'i, French-man, lying but ſaid iſothing; atthe Bars us,us,a Somouth, Vyho plainly ſavv asſoon Vve had left him behind vve ſhipp'd out our Oares, and Rowv 2.2( the notſ. vve had Rovved Four Miles .) byRowving right into the Sea, our courſe vvas Weſt-North-Weſt: wwhen Ship atAnchor, vvhich oborthereabout, vve diſcern’d a lig'd wve had paſt her, fearingat usalter our courſe, and Rowv Northward, untilto Salli-Ship,beleaſt ſhe mightTvvo a them vwerein, therefore ofand wwe had learn'd Machaneſs that that time, andcruizing not yet comeata itthis Ship,ofindiſtruſtthat vve altered our courſe vvithout the Ship, andup wwas, ; wve Rovved about Tvvo Leagues lay upon our Oares; vwhen Day broke looſe, clear, vve ſavv Ship vyithConſorts, then acquaintedher Sailesthe myI my judgment, the Ship wwere that time, becauſe the ofSaá.inthat at if inſhe vvould make for the Bar Tide and the Sea breeze vvere then both favourable, it the Clock, butbeing High-vvater ofatSeven ſhe vvere vviſh'd, thenoff if anEngliſh Man War,ofinceſſantlyvweas vve thought the Sea-breeze vvould make her ſtand toSea: Notwithſtanding to our opinions weredo; various, and we were my conſorts,atlength perſwadeddoubtful what I us,and make her hull, then the Ship. we pull'd aboard, towith much ado, inrow ſtood off, and length ſawatand found bethe Lark-Friggot Captain Leighton Commander;toher after ſome Examination and Diſcourſe about the Methods he up in, the Captain ſign which had newly taken ſtrong poſſeſſion me with his Boat, War, which Mamora; The Captain im deoftoour Eſcape, propoundedand Means aI my Fancy, ofit was this, that would accommodateif ofand thoſe belonging the other Two Mento Company,intoPilot themwould undertake andwere I toburo what Ships were then at tothe Northward, and camemediately with theſtood which were the Bonaventure and the Grayother Two Ships, Cales, Captain we went aboard him, and for hound; The Admiral was then Sick being Eldeſt Captain, ſoat Macdonald ſendingJ. Mr. Fairborne, who was then Captain underCap.. Captain Prieftman, ( 23) who was Sick as aboveſaid, they held a , milu indſeCouncil about thoſe propoſitions which I had made; at firſt they ſeemed unpraćticable, by reaſon of many difficulties, ſ' but eſpecially of the Bar, which is worſe than that of Saúč; king Wer.but then when upon Second thoughts they conſidered the forwardneſs of Men, who but that very Day had eſcapt a heavy Slavery, and yet were willing that very Night to en Ofth them themgage in the action, they concluded it both poſſible and fea#. ſo they with approbation what I had pro Caſtentertain'd pos'd ; After which I immediately return'd with Captain Qūt b0.Ileighton aboard the Lark, and communicated the reſult of by the Council with my Comrade Mr. Baxter, who was heartily pleas'd with what was undertaken, and willing to go along, Wel ſo he was ordered to go in the Bonaventure's Boat, and was $n. very ſerviceable, and who was better acquainted with that Bar, than I was. Immediately orders were given to ſhave and ſaw ſome Tarr-barrels, Seven : T. te, ſome Deal-boards, and make rea Night,allalldy with expedition; things wereat go readineſs, the Friggots were riding Two Leagues from Shore, orders were given that the Boat which was,I Captainby in viz.in the Gray-hound's, head, Commandedſhould a to Macdonald, who behaved himſelf indeed with great Courage and Reſolution, and the reſt had orders follow us; there all, and one Yawl, ofwere Three Barges the adion, was Forty two, who Meninthe number allhad ſtrićtinconcern'd Death, ſeek after Plunder, whichoftocharge upon pain not Night we put off by punétually obſerv'd. About Eight from the Ships, and betwixt Nine and Ten, we fell was at littlea the Bar, butoftoMr. Baxter's aſſiſtance, the Bar; there the Northward we quickly righted our ſelves, and found allupon the Shore, had takengreat noiſe thereaboutwas a we we the Alarm, which did nothing diſcourage us, luſtily, their hideous outcries, proceeded atwithout any concernment which when the Moors perceiv'd, and that advanc'd with un-. t (24)*.. . Reſolutions, they thought it beſt to and ſecure themſelves and their Caſtle; in ſliebetimesundaunted the mean time we utſu'd our deſign towards the Ships, aboard which, there many Lights, obſerv'd the Moors lookingwebeing greata over the ſides came the Two, they them with about Twenty Granado-ſhells, ofweus, far to,was the bigger keep off, we the firſt which oftotocall'd anſwered which ſoon drove them overboard; they eſcape, for the the Ship, with tohad not indeed ofBoats length ſoCaſtle Wall was within a out any difficulty we preſently entred; one Moor we found aboard, who was preſently pieces, another was ſhotincut eſcape upon the Cable, we our Shavings and, Tarr-barrels, ſhefor there were ſeveral Barrels newly Tarr'd puronof reſet the head, endeavouring were not long into takinginin ontoſeveral places, ſhe being very aptinherſoand fire weof we deſign'd, Tat upon the Deck, and whatceive onasifwas roſe; whilſt were ſetting her fire, we heard noiſea of the Hold, we opened the Skuttles, and thereby Four Chriſtians, Three Dutch-men and One ome people in fav'd the fives onFrench, who told that the Shipusfire was Admiral and webelong'd Aly-Hackum, and the other whichtoſoon after meI ſee I the ſame ſauce,cartile, which Captive, cannot deny that ofPlummageferv'd with had the Name the very Ship, which inOctober laſtwas an on my poſſeſſed with for this Ship fire, and God, I cauſe, took was extraordinary ſatisfaction to oftocould not but admire the wonderful providence ofvindicatingunwitting inſtrument I an whom alone Vengeance belongeth, and making me injuries in therevenge, ofreceived from the this Veſſel. owners ofus, the “Flames, that from the Ships fides, vvhereby ve the Moors, vvho from the ofSuch was the fierceneſs be wve vvere offto tokeepforc'd ‘came ºbnoxious the ſhot ofofWalls the Caſtle made botha | ornogreat firing upon ſmall and great Guns, but vwith little Execution, for Our* ( 25) our Men, by the light of the great fire having them infer feół view.. made ſmart returns upon them, firing inceſſantly;upon them, and with that eagerneſs, that they quite negleåed their Cares, ſo that if the Tide had not turt.” to Ebb, we ſhould have run a great riſque, our Men were ſo full of joy, hooping and hallowing at the ſight of ſo deſirable a Bon-fire, that they never minded the dangers they might be ſubject to ; we were therefore forced to tow the Bonaventure's Yawl, who had loſt allher allMan mortallyInOares. this A&tion we had but one three more ſlightly. hurt; after we we wounded, and two had compleated or our buſineſs, and abſolutely deſtroyed theſe the River, over theShips,ſº, Bar, andofreturn'd' out us we the Friggots, Captain Macdonald received his Ship aboard, which we ſtaid until of ulfd aboard usand gratified with the entertainment .£ales, there tofrankly, we came forwent aſhore, deſigning paſſage Engea I of an Iand with the firſt opportunity; Captain Macdonald gave the late A&tion, and then Mr. Baxter and him; we did not ſtay longfor aboard Captain Atkins, who came usour'ſervice of inCertificates took leave Cales, before opportunity Englandatwe met with from Leghorn and was for us bound London, who very willingly granted with him, aſid gave uspaſſageentertainment,civil and welcome allour Benefactors, parti.whom Gºd reward otherand ed I cularly (tho'when occaſion offers, appear unthankful, and Pºrtinence than ungratitude) upon allmay ſeems immaterial, yetgood Men willim toſome Readers it toremember, betonot withhad rather tax’d Mr. Hodges, who beſtow Eightofneceſſity, GodusFour pieces inour we hisSharityencreaſe, Barrel hisbleſſingand honeſt Captain Gutteridge, who ſent into Boſome withreturn own and . ofaHundrº weight ofBread, leaſtBeaf anda lietoo chargeable upon Captain Atkins inourſhould paſſage ( 26)gº. gº.home, who the itſet..º.º. º:from Cadiz, and arrived in the Downs the zöth. of that Month. , . . . . .. . *:: Thus have I given a ſhort and plain account of my Captivity and Eſcape, with the circum: and tho' poſſiblyrough and unpoliſh'd, whic ReaderI it,mſtances that attended Stile may appear hope willthe courteous little exa nocuſe, expcºting blunt Seaman;other from a I acquainted with nothingStorms, yet Dangers do profeſs have Penn'd this the#:and truth, thatſo I asmuch d allNarrative with to to plair-dealing (kihdi Country-mail and courteous Reader) excite with methy praiſes. our God the only deliverer, who hath de deEngliſh-man: Mybecomes a is,allſign and aim in upforof cruel and ſevere Captivity,thy grateful reſentments, for the happineſs, peace and freedom, that thou cajoycſ under...ſo excellent, and well tempered Government, but moſt eſpecially livered me from a toſtirand withal a move thy pitty to tojoſeph,the afflićtions #.by thy compaſſionarc regardjor Country-mºn Languiſhing endeavour their releaſment tothoſemiexcite innow and Irons, to according tothy pewer; atleaſt importuning... ( 27) their and hisCaptivityGrace, to toreſiſt tuning Heaven, that during God would ſupport them with afflićtions, Temptationshe hispatiently theirbear allgood appointeduntil in time, happy déliverance,vouchſafe them a Amen. FINS.I -|-|-|-|-|--|-------|-|- |- |- |- |- |- |- ||-- |- |-|- |- |- |- |-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-􀀀|×|-􀀀|×|--|-ſae -􀀀--.|×-· |× |-􀀀|×|-. � ſ.|× |×· |×ſae� ·|×ſae ſae. 